Ah, well, it's the tree, someone was hit by that
tree. That one. Yes, it's a tree that still exists,
that tree is still there, when he was little. What
happened? They hit him, they wanted to hang him on
that stick. Yes, they wanted to, they hit him.
That's what I was telling you before, that these
people went to the movies at night. Yes. They told
one, That night they took chivas, cows, oxen and
everything. They made cattle and took them away.
And they say, tomorrow if you want to go and claim
your animals, go to Cerro Culano, there's a road
there, so they can deliver them. Lies. There was a
town called El Jaral, retired from there. My
father told a friend of mine, he said, for me, these
people, these are not zombies, they don't know
what kind of people they are. Let's go, let's go and
follow the animals. Well, let's go, and they left.
They left until they got to that village, to that
village called Jaral. Well, they got there in the
afternoon, And in the afternoon, because there in
the village they also have cattle, they made them
there, they have a lot of places to lock them up. And
they went down the street, like here in Bryan.
Well, they went down the street and the animals, as
they did not know, they went and shouted and how
much. And my father said to him, compadre, these
animals, I'm sure they are not from here, because
they are screaming a lot. Brahman or something
like that. Let's see. And they went to see. And they
found one that had two, two Chivas that they call
them in Mexico. They are Chips, I think. Well, they
found him and they looked.
And they brought, because in Mexico, everyone
sends a signal to their animals. Like here, they
also put iron or something. And then he said, where
are you taking those animals? I said, if I take them
to kill, they sold them to me. He said, those
animals are mine.
And they took them away. And one stayed with the
animals, those that he brought, and the others...
And the other one went to see those animals. And
they went to ask for help from the people, they were
in the village, to help them. And they said, yes,
right now they did the simulation, because they
were the same people from there. It's the same
people who stole. Those, as they had caravans and
horses, they went out to steal elsewhere and they
came and sold the animals. And there they have,
very in order, like here in the village. We make an
appearance. The employees bring guns, and they
can go to... They gather 4 or 5, and they go and rob a
bank or whatever, and here they are in the day.
They're doing it there. Yes. What help did they
have? One who lived in the ranch there didn't have
any help, because there wasn't any. Let's see,
when he brought a reason to the people, If it's two
hours away, it's too late when they come to help.
And all that, without a phone, without anything,
you know? I think there were phones,
but I think only those who had a lot of money had
that. Because I never remember that there was a
school in the ranch. I don't remember that there
was a school
there. We grew up, we went to work, to help my
father. And the time has passed since there was no
work, as there is no work here anymore. It's just in
the house.
I grew up without any letters, and there
are many people still like that. And
after you When he left his ranch, did he have
letters or cards or other things with his family
there? Yes, when I came here, yes, I looked for
someone to give me a letter to write to my father.
Because he was the only one who lived there. My
mother had died when I was there. Your mother
was... My mother died. My father lived there. And I
wrote to my father from here. And I lost my
direction and it didn't last long. It lasted a long
time without writing, without knowing,
without anything. And I came to find the direction
of my brother, because there was a boy who was
working in Camino Fierro. He was six years old,
working in Camino Fierro. And that boy was
practicing from Salamanca.
And that's when I asked him. And he told me that his
mother had... that she was going to sell something
for the ranch. He said, I'm going to ask her to see if
she has her brother. The next time he wrote, he
said, write to my mother. I'm going to ask her to see
if she has her
brother. And that's how I found my brother's
address. Yes. The last time I went. He didn't last
long, about a year or two. He died, he was killed
too. He died? He was killed. He was killed? His...
Him and two real children on the same day. His
brother was killed? Who? Do you know what it would
be like? That's what my brother-in-law says.
Soldiers? No. No, and now it's been a little while.
In what year did they kill him? I don't know. I don't
know. It's been more than five years, yes. He was on
the road to hell, right? Yes. No, it's been about 15
years, I think. 15 years ago? Because they were
coming, they didn't know they were coming from
there. It's been about 15 years. They killed three
of them in the same day. Three? Three. The boys are
already old. That was the father, who is now his
brother. He was the father, and he had a son
married, leaving because he had three families.
And he had a boy, a 17-year-old boy. They killed the
three of them. Who? Well, who knows who it would be,
and who knows why it would be. We don't know. And
this is only five years ago? Fifteen years.
Fifteen years. Yes, fifteen years. Fifteen
years. And in which part? In Salamanca? In
Salamanca. In Salamanca, in the city? Yes, there.
In their house? In the ranch. Oh, it was in the
ranch. Yes, because they lived in the ranch. In
their house? No. No. It was like a little village.
According to my sister-in-law, it was... I don't
know. There were some shops. They were
celebrating something. I don't know what they
were celebrating, but they were going to a party.
It was like a party, something like that. And they
were killing them. The three of them? The three of
them. But no one knows who? Yes, they knew who it
was. But I didn't know how much time it took for the
man. Because they told me this time that he was
going out. Yes. That man, that man must have taken
him from bad to his 30 or 40 years in prison. Well, he
shot three, killed him in a little while, three.
Well, he must have taken him. Yes. If not, if he
couldn't take more. But, because here the law
punishes a lot. Here there are some who are 90 years
old, because that's the house of a man. The one who
is 90 years old, what defense does he have? Here,
he's just going to die there. In what way? With a
gun? With a gun. During the party? Yes. Are there
problems like this during the holidays? Yes, it's
like here. Like here, well, let's say like here.
Well, there are the canteens of the people. There
they make a plate, well, they kill one or two, and
that's how it happened to them there. I think it
would be outside or in the canteen, I don't know. My
sister-in-law almost never talked to me about it.
But there are problems like this here in Bryan.
Yes. In the canteens. In the canteens. In the
ranch, no. Where we went, there are no canteens.
No. They are in the village. The canteens are in the
village. There was a little part over there, there
was one, but it was also removed. But the people are
there. Y el pueblo más cerca está Salamanca. Sí.
Pero esta fiesta estaba en el rancho. Estaba en el
rancho, sí. Estaba en el rancho. ¿Hay fiestas en el
rancho cuando usted estaba joven, ayer? Me
acuerdo de una, de una que, que le hacían como,
pues una fiesta que le nombraron la Virgen, ¿Qué
sería? ¿Un pechín? ¿No? Pues una cosa así, ¿no? Yo
me acuerdo que hacían una fiesta ahí, sería para el
día 2, ¿de qué? De la Candelaria, ¿no? Yo creo que
sí, es como en este mes. Febrero. Sí, en febrero. En
este mes, sí. Candelaria, yo creo que sí.
Candelaria.
And what happened at the parties? Well, they just
played and danced and everything. I don't
remember what happened. And? And from there
to there, I don't remember what happened. I saw
another one and I don't know if it lasted or not. But
once it happened. Once it happened. There was also
a complaint. There
was also a complaint because And I remember that I
was in the middle and I stayed in the middle of the
crowd, because that's how it was. Well, someone
came from the past, I was there, he left me such a big
knife, he gave it to me, the knife. Well, I raised
it, I raised it, and he didn't come back anymore,
and I left and I took it to my house. It was used to cut
sticks and other things. It was very heavy. Yes. If
they hit you with a machete, you hit your head a lot.
Yes. And I took it home. And my brother, since he
also had some chivas there that we had in the house,
this one with him, he would hit the branches over
there, the animals, the chivas. And one day the man
who left me the knife said to me, I saw him. He said,
he saw your knife and he showed it to you. He said, he
saw it and he took it away. He took it away. But I
remember that man in the kitchen left me that
knife. There are so many. You treated all your
family members. Let's see. There are so many.
There are so many. There are so many. There are so
many. There are so many. There are so many.
These. And these too. Yes. These are the... Yes,
those too. There are all of them. All of them are
relatives. All of them are relatives, yes. All of
them are nephews. Yes. And most of these nephews
live in the city? Yes, they do. In Salamanca? Yes,
in Salamanca. They live there. Do some of them live
on the ranch? No, no, I don't think so. I don't have
any idea. No, no, I don't think so. No, no, I don't
have any idea. No, no, I don't have any idea. No, no,
I don't have any idea. No, no, I don't have any idea.
No, no, I don't have any idea. No, no, I don't have
any idea. No, no, I don't have any idea. No, no, I
don't have any idea. No, no, I don't have any idea.
No, no, I don't have any idea. No, no, I don't have
any idea. No, no, I don't have any idea. No, no, I
don't have any idea. No, no, I don't have any idea.
No, no, I don't have any idea. No, no, I don't have
any idea. No, no, I don't have any idea. No
No, no, that's not it. There's another
one. Oh, my goodness. I'm a person. These are the
ones that live in the ranchito, these ones still.
They are very poor in the ranchito. But they don't?
No, they all live in the town. In the town? Yes, in
the town. And are they poor? No, no. Look at this
Salvador, this one came here, this one. Yes, he
came here and lived with us. He came here and lived
with us. He came here and lived with us. He came here
and lived with us. He came here and lived with us. He
came here and lived with us. He came here and lived
with us. He came here and lived with us. He came here
and lived with us. He came here and lived with us. He
came here and lived with us. He came here and lived
with us. He came here and lived with us. He came here
and lived with us. He came here and lived with us. He
came here and lived with us. He came here and lived
with us. He came here and lived with us. He came here
and lived with us. He came here and lived with us. He
came here and lived with us. He came here and lived
with us. He came here and lived with us. He came here
and lived with us. He came here and lived with us. He
came here and lived with us. He came here and lived
with us. He came here and lived with And this family
on the ranch is the poorest? Yes, yes. They live on
the ranch. This is my nephew, the man. Yes. The man
is my nephew. And this is my sister-in-law. This is
my sister-in-law. So you were the youngest in the
family, or the eldest? Who, me? Yes. Of your
siblings. There was one older than me, two. Two
older than me. Two brothers? Two brothers. One
sister and one brother older than me. And from
there I had two brothers. One, the one over there,
is younger than me. And one sister is younger than
the other, and the last one too. How many were there
for all of you? Five, right? Five, yes. Well,
during these days,
when I thought about going to the United States, do
you remember what kind of thoughts I had? Well, I
told my father that I wanted to come to the United
States They also came from the ranch. They came
from there, to the United States. I told them I
wanted to come because they were going to come, and
I didn't want to go with them. And I came. We all went
through it. We all went through it. It's just that
some of us went that way, others that way. Because
some of us went back. In 1921, everything became
more and more difficult because there was no work.
The work started to run out and everything. And I
also spent a lot of time that I didn't work. I
settled down with a man there in Roquedero. And
there I was working for a whole year without being
paid anything, just giving me food. Y
hasta que de allí me salí y me fui para las minas acá
fue cuando ya empecé a trabajar yo.
Pues en el primer año pensabas sobre volviendo a
México, a su familia otra vez? Pues sí, pensaba ir
para México. Sí. I thought that I couldn't go
without taking a penny. How could I come here? I've
been here for six or seven months. How could I come
here without taking a penny? That's why I said that
I'd better starve. Yes. That...
How do you say it? To return to Mexico like this,
without money. Yes. I didn't think it was right
either to tell my father to send me money to go. It
wasn't right. And that's why I wanted to go. And I
didn't bring any papers or anything, and the
immigration never investigated me for anything.
until 1935
or 1936. Around that time. I went to Laredo. Me and
my wife. I had two girls.
And I went to Laredo. And that was the first time the
immigration department investigated me. papers
and all that. I didn't know anything about papers.
They did tell me, they did tell me, but the people
who already lived here said, well, you need this,
you need that to live here. Well, they didn't tell
me anything. That time they investigated me, they
let me go. And that's how I was born. They said they
were going to put something in San Antonio, that
they were going to Well, as you wish, they would
just write to me directly from San Antonio, that
would be all. Now, there was a year when they
demanded that everyone who was not a citizen of
here, that one had to fill out some cards that we are
filling out every year. Yes. Every year we have to
fill out those cards to know that we are still here.
And the people who told me, because there were some
who asked me when we got those papers, those cards,
they said, how many years do you think you're going
to stay here? Yes. Well, I'm going to stay 15 years
or 20 or more. And I told them that I thought I was
going to live here all my life. I think about living
here all my life until I die. Well, the neighbors
went to fill the blanks, and that's how it went. But
they have told me, it will
be true, that those who were told that they were
going to live here for 15 years, 10 years, at 15
years old they came and they were looking for them
and they went to Mexico. Yes. Because that's what
they have said. Because before, they didn't have
passports or anything. There were passports when
I passed. Yes. But back then, they just paid a
nickel at the bridge and they passed to this side.
They didn't need anything. Now it's very
difficult because... It's very hard to get to
Mexico. Yes. To get from there to here. From there.
Also from here to there. Yes, because in the past
they would scold you a lot. But now with the
passport it's much easier. Yes, it's easier, but
let's say that I take my Belize. Well, from there
you have to open it to see what it takes and all that.
It's the same here, wherever you want. Do you want
to visit Mexico again? Well, who knows? I don't
know. If there is a way, yes. If not, then...
Because it costs a lot of money too. Yes. And do you
want to visit Mexico again? Well, I would like to,
but who knows? Who knows? She leaves here and comes
back with 30 pesos. Yes, because my relatives are
from Piedras Negras. In Piedras Negras? Yes,
Rosita. Rosita,
yes. No, my parents are very
far away. They are very far away, that's why they
didn't make it very hard for me, because we were in
the airplane and soon we left. From there to here
it's the same. We arrived very early in San
Antonio. We stayed the whole day. We left at 5 in the
morning from there, from Salamanca, in the bus, to
come and take the plane to Guadalajara. It seems
that at 1 in the morning, I don't know what time,
like it was 9 and a half, we arrived in San Antonio.
At 8 o'clock at night we would be here having dinner
with the girls
who came to bring us. Do you like life here more than
in Mexico? Yes, it's better here. I'm more
comfortable here. Because since I came here,
well, I already told you that They would go at night
and hit or beat someone. No one would come here to
bother anyone. No one would come here to do their
job. No one would come here to bother anyone. But
there? There, yes. At night? At night. Now? Now, I
don't know, but back then, yes. Yes. Since he's
alone over there, he's alone. He's not like here.
All the ranches that are there, here, it's
different because anyone in the ranch has a phone.
If something happened to him at home, he would call
them. Yes. But over there, without a phone or
anything.
Yes, it's different. It was very hard at that time.
And here, that's why I like to live. No revolution,
no war, no nothing. I mean, over there, but far
away. Here, no one has seen anything. Well, what do
you think about the revolution in Mexico for these
years in Mexico? Was it a good thing or not? I mean, I
don't know.
It's almost as if she wasn't very good either.
Well, fighting with each other is good. Because
with each other they are fighting. And I, why
should I say no? We put an appearance
here that says that I am here in my house. Yes. And
that's his thing. Well, we're going to fight and
we're fighting. Then I grab four or five to help me.
Here it's the same. And the same because it's one
game and another. Well, I think that the people in
Mexico, not everyone has a studio or anything.
That's why it's all that. Yes. That's why it was all
that. They fought for nothing. The money, the
money that was there, was never used. In the time of
the revolution, the
money was never used. The money that was there, if
Villa was here in this town, he made a kind of... a
kind of murder cards that had diamonds marked. It
was paper. And from there they would smear it, what
was it, nickel or diamond, they would smear it. The
one that sold. That money, I don't know how, I
grabbed it from behind, so that it was money,
because they were papers, they were cardboard.
Another one came and it lasted another month or two
there in the town. And he put his money, the same, of
another kind of money. Some
people say that life in Mexico
now is better for a lot of people because of the
revolution. Yes, that's why. Do you think it's the
truth? Well, I think it is, it is the truth. That
because of the revolution, it became a bit...
because all the men who had a lot of land... the farm
had people working. And they worked the land and
raised a lot more, beans, pumpkin, and all that.
And when it was finished, when they picked up all
the corn, there was nothing left that worked on the
land. Everything was taken by the man, the owner of
the land. All of it? There were no farms that had
land? No, no. Not like here. Here, well, you have
100 acres and you maintain them. Yes. And another
one has 200 reais the same, but not there. There one
only had all that land, a lot of land. So the
revolution came doing this, after the revolution
that came, it came distributing the land that the
owner of the land wanted or didn't want, they were
going to give a piece of land to each one there, and
they marked them. so that whatever they raised
there, they would keep it. And he too, he worked his
land and he kept what he raised. That's what he did
in Mexico, what they did in Mexico. To give a piece
of land to everyone in the parts where they had a lot
of land. And
his brother still... My sister-in-law had a piece
of land. She showed me a part of the land that she
had. And she told me that the other part had been
taken away because she was left
alone. They took away another piece of land that
had been given to her. And that land was given to her
so that she could work and maintain it. They can't
sell it. I don't think anyone else can sell
it. Well...